arenadata/README.md, before:

# Run regression tests in Docker container

You can build your Docker image from GPDB source or use prebuilt images from hub.adsw.io.
How to build Docker image: (["readme.md"](https://github.com/arenadata/gpdb/blob/f7ff7c8ecae4ce7ab3b73fd46171cdaa457b3591/arenadata/readme.md)).

1. Download the cmake-3.20 install script from ([source](https://github.com/Kitware/CMake/releases/download/v3.20.0/cmake-3.20.0-linux-x86_64.sh)).

2. Build diskquota in the Docker container.
Change <PATH_TO_DISKQUOTA_SRC> and <PATH_TO_CMAKE_INSTALL_SCRIPT> to the appropriate paths on your local machine.

```
docker run --rm -it -e DISKQUOTA_OS=rhel7 \
       -v /tmp/diskquota_artifacts:/home/gpadmin/diskquota_artifacts \
       -v <PATH_TO_DISKQUOTA_SRC>:/home/gpadmin/diskquota_src \
       -v <PATH_TO_CMAKE_INSTALL_SCRIPT>:/home/gpadmin/bin_cmake/cmake-3.20.0-linux-x86_64.sh \
       hub.adsw.io/library/gpdb6_regress:latest diskquota_src/concourse/scripts/entry.sh build
```

3. Run tests.
Change <PATH_TO_DISKQUOTA_SRC> and <PATH_TO_CMAKE_INSTALL_SCRIPT> to the appropriate paths on your local machine.

```
docker run --rm -it --sysctl 'kernel.sem=500 1024000 200 4096' \
       -v /tmp/diskquota_artifacts:/home/gpadmin/bin_diskquota \
       -v <PATH_TO_DISKQUOTA_SRC>:/home/gpadmin/diskquota_src \
       -v <PATH_TO_CMAKE_INSTALL_SCRIPT>:/home/gpadmin/bin_cmake/cmake-3.20.0-linux-x86_64.sh \
       hub.adsw.io/library/gpdb6_regress:latest diskquota_src/concourse/scripts/entry.sh test
```

Commit message:

Fix tests for GPDB 7 (#44)
The tests failed if it ran with GPDB 7. This patch makes the following changes:

1. In `test_create_extension` (both in regress and isolation2) use
`default_table_access_method` GUC instead of `gp_default_storage_options`
since `gp_default_storage_options` can't be used for appendonly in GPDB 7.
Since we can't choose which one to use, we run both, expecting one of them to
fail.
2. In `test_activetable_limit` and `test_rejectmap_limit` (regress) change log
reading function to read from either `pg_logs` or `logs`, depending on which
one is available.
3. In `test_dropped_table` and `test_temporary_table` (isolation2) add
matchsubs to account for different command output on GPDB 7.
4. Update README to indicate support for GPDB 7 on Ubuntu 22.

Ticket: ADBDEV-6699

arenadata/README.md, after:

# Run regression tests in Docker container

You can build your Docker image from GPDB source or use prebuilt images from hub.adsw.io.
How to build Docker image: (["readme.md"](https://github.com/arenadata/gpdb/blob/f7ff7c8ecae4ce7ab3b73fd46171cdaa457b3591/arenadata/readme.md)).

## Supported GPDB images

- `hub.adsw.io/library/gpdb6_regress:latest`
- `hub.adsw.io/library/gpdb6_u22:latest`
- `hub.adsw.io/library/gpdb7_u22:latest`

## Steps to run tests

1. Download the cmake-3.20 install script from ([source](https://github.com/Kitware/CMake/releases/download/v3.20.0/cmake-3.20.0-linux-x86_64.sh)).

2. Build diskquota in the Docker container.
Change <PATH_TO_DISKQUOTA_SRC> and <PATH_TO_CMAKE_INSTALL_SCRIPT> to the appropriate paths on your local machine, and <IMAGE> to a supported GPDB docker image.

```
docker run --rm -it -e DISKQUOTA_OS=rhel7 \
       -v /tmp/diskquota_artifacts:/home/gpadmin/diskquota_artifacts \
       -v <PATH_TO_DISKQUOTA_SRC>:/home/gpadmin/diskquota_src \
       -v <PATH_TO_CMAKE_INSTALL_SCRIPT>:/home/gpadmin/bin_cmake/cmake-3.20.0-linux-x86_64.sh \
       <IMAGE> diskquota_src/concourse/scripts/entry.sh build
```

3. Run tests.
Change <PATH_TO_DISKQUOTA_SRC> and <PATH_TO_CMAKE_INSTALL_SCRIPT> to the appropriate paths on your local machine, and <IMAGE> to a supported GPDB docker image.

```
docker run --rm -it --sysctl 'kernel.sem=500 1024000 200 4096' \
       -v /tmp/diskquota_artifacts:/home/gpadmin/bin_diskquota \
       -v <PATH_TO_DISKQUOTA_SRC>:/home/gpadmin/diskquota_src \
       -v <PATH_TO_CMAKE_INSTALL_SCRIPT>:/home/gpadmin/bin_cmake/cmake-3.20.0-linux-x86_64.sh \
       <IMAGE> diskquota_src/concourse/scripts/entry.sh test
```
